
_The Headswoman_




_BY THE SAME AUTHOR_

  THE GOLDEN AGE
  DREAM DAYS
  PAGAN PAPERS

THE BODLEY HEAD




    [Frontispiece: "Now that we have been properly introduced allow
     me to apologise"]




THE HEADSWOMAN

_By_ Kenneth Grahame


_With Illustrations in Colour and Woodcuts by_

Marcia Lane Foster


[Decoration]


  _LONDON_
  _John Lane The Bodley Head Limited_
  _New York        John Lane Company_




  _First Published 1898_
  _Illustrated Edition 1921_




_Printed In Great Britain by R. Clay & Sons, Ltd., Bungay, Suffolk._




_List of Illustrations_


  "Now That we have been properly introduced
      allow me to apologise"                  _Frontispiece_

                                               _Facing page_
  "You see I am Familiar with the Routine....
      Good-morning, Gentlemen!"                          8

  "Au revoir, Sir! If you should happen to be in
      the Market-place any Morning"                     28

  Endeavouring to convey the Tardy Prisoner to the
      Scaffold                                          32

  "Nay, pardon me, Sweet One, 'twas but a Jest
      of Mine"                                          36

  But at this point a Hubbub arose at the Foot of
      the Scaffold                                      42

  "Now, mark my Words, you Miserable Little
      Bladder-o'-Lard, see if I don't take this
      out of your Skin presently"                       44

  An Invitation arrived, backed by an Escort of
      Half-a-dozen very Tall Archers                    46




_The Headswoman_




[Illustration]

I


It was a bland, sunny morning of a mediæval May,--an old-style May of
the most typical quality; and the Council of the little town of St.
Radegonde were assembled, as was their wont at that hour, in the
picturesque upper chamber of the Hôtel de Ville, for the dispatch of the
usual municipal business. Though the date was early sixteenth century,
the members of this particular town-council possessed considerable
resemblance to those of similar assemblies in the seventeenth,
eighteenth, and even the nineteenth centuries, in a general absence of
any characteristic at all--unless a pervading hopeless insignificance
can be considered as such. All the character in the room, indeed, seemed
to be concentrated in the girl who stood before the table, erect, yet at
her ease, facing the members in general and Mr. Mayor in particular; a
delicate-handed, handsome girl of some eighteen summers, whose tall,
supple figure was well set off by the quiet, though tasteful mourning in
which she was clad.

"Well, gentlemen," the Mayor was saying, "this little business appears
to be--er--quite in order, and it only remains for me to--er--review the
facts. You are aware that the town has lately had the misfortune to
lose its executioner,--a gentleman who, I may say, performed the duties
of his office with neatness and dispatch, and gave the fullest
satisfaction to all with whom he--er--came in contact. But the Council
has already, in a vote of condolence, expressed its sense of
the--er--striking qualities of the deceased. You are doubtless also
aware that the office is hereditary, being secured to a particular
family in this town, so long as any one of its members is ready and
willing to take it up. The deed lies before me, and appears to
be--er--quite in order. It is true that on this occasion the Council
might have been called upon to consider and examine the title of the
claimant, the late lamented official having only left a daughter,--she
who now stands before you; but I am happy to say that Jeanne--the young
lady in question--with what I am bound to call great good-feeling on
her part, has saved us all trouble in that respect, by formally applying
for the family post, with all its--er--duties, privileges, and
emoluments; and her application appears to be--er--quite in order. There
is, therefore, under the circumstances, nothing left for us to do but to
declare the said applicant duly elected. I would wish, however, before
I--er--sit down, to make it quite clear to the--er--fair petitioner,
that if a laudable desire to save the Council trouble in the matter has
led her to a--er--hasty conclusion, it is quite open to her to
reconsider her position. Should she determine not to press her claim,
the succession to the post would then apparently devolve upon her cousin
Enguerrand, well known to you all as a practising advocate in the courts
of this town. Though the youth has not, I admit, up to now proved a
conspicuous success in the profession he has chosen, still there is no
reason why a bad lawyer should not make an excellent executioner; and in
view of the close friendship--may I even say attachment?--existing
between the cousins, it is possible that this young lady may, in due
course, practically enjoy the solid emoluments of the position without
the necessity of discharging its (to some girls) uncongenial duties. And
so, though not the rose herself, she would still be--er--near the rose!"
And the Mayor resumed his seat, chuckling over his little pleasantry,
which the keener wits of the Council proceeded to explain at length to
the more obtuse.

"Permit me, Mr. Mayor," said the girl quietly, "first to thank you for
what was evidently the outcome of a kindly though misdirected feeling on
your part; and then to set you right as to the grounds of my application
for the post to which you admit my hereditary claim. As to my cousin,
your conjecture as to the feeling between us is greatly exaggerated; and
I may further say at once, from my knowledge of his character, that he
is little qualified either to adorn or to dignify an important position
such as this. A man who has achieved such indifferent success in a minor
and less exacting walk of life, is hardly likely to shine in an
occupation demanding punctuality, concentration, judgment,--all the
qualities, in fine, that go to make a good business man. But this is
beside the question. My motive, gentlemen, in demanding what is my due,
is a simple and (I trust) an honest one, and I desire that there should
be no misunderstanding. It is my wish to be dependent on no one. I am
both willing and able to work, and I only ask for what is the common
right of humanity,--admission to the labour market. How many poor,
toiling women would simply jump at a chance like this which fortune, by
the accident of birth, lays open to me! And shall I, from any false
deference to that conventional voice which proclaims this thing as
'nice,' and that thing as 'not nice,' reject a handicraft which promises
me both artistic satisfaction and a competence? No, gentlemen; my claim
is a small one,--only a fair day's wage for a fair day's work. But I can
accept nothing less, nor consent to forgo my rights, even for any
contingent remainder of possible cousinly favour!"

There was a touch of scorn in her fine contralto voice as she finished
speaking; the Mayor himself beamed approval. He was not wealthy, and had
a large family of daughters; so Jeanne's sentiments seemed to him
entirely right and laudable.

"Well, gentlemen," he began briskly, "then all we've got to do, is
to----"

"Beg pardon, your worship," put in Master Robinet, the tanner, who had
been sitting with a petrified, Bill-the-Lizard sort of expression during
the speechifying: "but are we to understand as how this here young lady
is going to be the public executioner of this here town?"

"Really, neighbour Robinet," said the Mayor, somewhat pettishly, "you've
got ears like the rest of us, I suppose; and you know the contents of
the deed; and you've had my assurance that it's--er--quite in order; and
as it's getting towards lunch-time----"

"But it's unheard of," protested honest Robinet. "There hasn't ever been
no such thing--leastways not as I've heard tell."

    [Illustration: "You see I am familiar with the routine....
     Good-morning, Gentlemen!"]

"Well, well, well," said the Mayor, "everything must have a beginning, I
suppose. Times are different now, you know. There's the march of
intellect, and--er--all that sort of thing. We must advance with the
times--don't you see, Robinet?--advance with the times!"

"Well, I'm----" began the tanner.

But no one heard, on this occasion, the tanner's opinion as to his
condition, physical or spiritual; for the clear contralto cut short his
obtestations.

"If there's really nothing more to be said, Mr. Mayor," she remarked, "I
need not trespass longer on your valuable time. I propose to take up the
duties of my office to-morrow morning, at the usual hour. The salary
will, I assume, be reckoned from the same date; and I shall make the
customary quarterly application for such additional emoluments as may
have accrued to me during that period. You see I am familiar with the
routine. Good-morning, gentlemen!" And as she passed from the Council
chamber, her small head held erect, even the tanner felt that she took
with her a large portion of the May sunshine which was condescending
that morning to gild their deliberations.




II


One evening, a few weeks later, Jeanne was taking a stroll on the
ramparts of the town, a favourite and customary walk of hers when
business cares were over. The pleasant expanse of country that lay
spread beneath her--the rich sunset, the gleaming, sinuous river, and
the noble old château that dominated both town and pasture from its
adjacent height--all served to stir and bring out in her those poetic
impulses which had lain dormant during the working day; while the cool
evening breeze smoothed out and obliterated any little jars or worries
which might have ensued during the practice of a profession in which she
was still something of a novice. This evening she felt fairly happy and
content. True, business was rather brisk, and her days had been fully
occupied; but this mattered little so long as her modest efforts were
appreciated, and she was now really beginning to feel that, with
practice, her work was creditably and artistically done. In a satisfied,
somewhat dreamy mood, she was drinking in the various sweet influences
of the evening, when she perceived her cousin approaching.

"Good-evening, Enguerrand," cried Jeanne pleasantly; she was thinking
that since she had begun to work for her living she had hardly seen
him--and they used to be such good friends. Could anything have occurred
to offend him?

Enguerrand drew near somewhat moodily, but could not help allowing his
expression to relax at sight of her fair young face, set in its
framework of rich brown hair, wherein the sunset seemed to have tangled
itself and to cling, reluctant to leave it.

"Sit down, Enguerrand," continued Jeanne, "and tell me what you've been
doing this long time. Been very busy, and winning forensic fame and
gold?"

"Well, not exactly," said Enguerrand, moody once more. "The fact is,
there's so much interest required nowadays at the courts that unassisted
talent never gets a chance. And you, Jeanne?"

"Oh, I don't complain," answered Jeanne lightly. "Of course, it's
fair-time just now, you know, and we're always busy then. But work will
be lighter soon, and then I'll get a day off, and we'll have a
delightful ramble and picnic in the woods, as we used to do when we were
children. What fun we had in those old days, Enguerrand! Do you
remember when we were quite little tots, and used to play at executions
in the back-garden, and you were a bandit and a buccaneer, and all sorts
of dreadful things, and I used to chop off your head with a paper-knife?
How pleased dear father used to be!"

"Jeanne," said Enguerrand, with some hesitation, "you've touched upon
the very subject that I came to speak to you about. Do you know, dear, I
can't help feeling--it may be unreasonable, but still the feeling is
there--that the profession you have adopted is not quite--is just a
little----"

"Now, Enguerrand!" said Jeanne, an angry flash sparkling in her eyes.
She was a little touchy on this subject, the word she most affected to
despise being also the one she most dreaded,--the adjective
"unladylike."

"Don't misunderstand me, Jeanne," went on Enguerrand imploringly: "you
may naturally think that, because I should have succeeded to the post,
with its income and perquisites, had you relinquished your claim, there
is therefore some personal feeling in my remonstrances. Believe me, it
is not so. My own interests do not weigh with me for a moment. It is on
your account, Jeanne, and yours alone, that I ask you to consider
whether the higher æsthetic qualities, which I know you possess, may not
become cramped and thwarted by 'the trivial round, the common task,'
which you have lightly undertaken. However laudable a professional life
may be, one always feels that with a delicate organism such as woman,
some of the bloom may possibly get rubbed off the peach."

"Well, Enguerrand," said Jeanne, composing herself with an effort,
though her lips were set hard, "I will do you the justice to believe
that personal advantage does not influence you, and I will try to reason
calmly with you, and convince you that you are simply hide-bound by
old-world prejudice. Now, take yourself, for instance, who come here to
instruct me: what does _your_ profession amount to, when all's said and
done? A mass of lies, quibbles, dodges, and tricks, that would make any
self-respecting executioner blush! And even with the dirty weapons at
your command, you make but a poor show of it. There was that wretched
fellow you defended only two days ago. (I was in court during the
trial--professional interest, you know.) Well, he had his regular
_alibi_ all ready, as clear as clear could be; only you must needs go
and mess and bungle the thing up, so that, just as I expected all
along, he was passed on to me for treatment in due course. You may like
to have his opinion--that of a shrewd, though unlettered person. 'It's a
real pleasure, miss,' he said, 'to be handled by you. You _knows_ your
work, and you _does_ your work--though p'raps I ses it as shouldn't. If
that blooming fool of a mouthpiece of mine'--he was referring to you,
dear, in your capacity of advocate--'had known his business half as well
as you do yours, I shouldn't a bin here now!' And you know, Enguerrand,
he was perfectly right."

"Well, perhaps he was," admitted Enguerrand. "You see, I had been
working at a sonnet the night before, and I couldn't get the rhymes
right, and they would keep coming into my head in court and mixing
themselves up with the _alibi_. But look here, Jeanne, when you saw I
was going off the track, you might have given me a friendly hint, you
know--for old times' sake, if not for the prisoner's!"

"I daresay," replied Jeanne calmly: "perhaps you'll tell me why I should
sacrifice my interests because you're unable to look after yours. You
forget that I receive a bonus, over and above my salary, upon each
exercise of my functions!"

"True," said Enguerrand gloomily: "I did forget that. I wish I had your
business aptitudes, Jeanne."

"I daresay you do," remarked Jeanne. "But you see, dear, how all your
arguments fall to the ground. You mistake a prepossession for a logical
base. Now if I had gone, like that Clairette you used to dangle after,
and been waiting-woman to some grand lady in a château,--a thin-blooded
compound of drudge and sycophant,--then, I suppose, you'd have been
perfectly satisfied. So feminine! So genteel!"

"She's not a bad sort of girl, little Claire," said Enguerrand
reflectively (thereby angering Jeanne afresh): "but putting her
aside,--of course you could always beat me at argument, Jeanne; you'd
have made a much better lawyer than I. But you know, dear, how much I
care about you; and I did hope that on that account even a prejudice,
however unreasonable, might have some little weight. And I'm not alone,
let me tell you, in my views. There was a fellow in court only to-day,
who was saying that yours was only a _succès d'estime_, and that woman,
as a naturally talkative and hopelessly unpunctual animal, could never
be more than a clever amateur in the profession you have chosen."

"That will do, Enguerrand," said Jeanne proudly; "it seems that when
argument fails, you can stoop so low as to insult me through my sex.
You men are all alike,--steeped in brutish masculine prejudice. Now go
away, and don't mention the subject to me again till you're quite
reasonable and nice."




III

Jeanne passed a somewhat restless night after her small scene with her
cousin, waking depressed and unrefreshed. Though she had carried matters
with so high a hand, and had scored so distinctly all around, she had
been more agitated than she had cared to show. She liked Enguerrand; and
more especially did she like his admiration for her; and that chance
allusion to Clairette contained possibilities that were alarming. In
embracing a professional career, she had never thought for a moment
that it could militate against that due share of admiration to which, as
a girl, she was justly entitled; and Enguerrand's views seemed this
morning all the more narrow and inexcusable. She rose languidly, and as
soon as she was dressed sent off a little note to the Mayor, saying that
she had a nervous headache and felt out of sorts, and begging to be
excused from attendance on that day; and the missive reached the Mayor
just as he was taking his usual place at the head of the Board.

"Dear, dear!" said the kind-hearted old man, as soon as he had read the
letter to his fellow-councilmen: "I'm very sorry. Poor girl! Here, one
of you fellows, just run round and tell the gaoler there won't be any
business to-day. Jeanne's seedy. It's put off till to-morrow. And now,
gentlemen, the agenda----"

"Really, your worship," exploded Robinet, "this is simply ridiculous!"

"Upon my word, Robinet," said the Mayor, "I don't know what's the matter
with you. Here's a poor girl unwell,--and a more hard-working girl isn't
in the town,--and instead of sympathising with her, and saying you're
sorry, you call it ridiculous! Suppose you had a headache yourself! You
wouldn't like----"

"But it _is_ ridiculous," maintained the tanner stoutly. "Who ever heard
of an executioner having a nervous headache? There's no precedent for
it. And 'out of sorts,' too! Suppose the criminals said they were out of
sorts, and didn't feel up to being executed?"

"Well, suppose they did," replied the Mayor, "we'd try and meet them
half-way, I daresay. They'd have to be executed some time or other, you
know. Why on earth are you so captious about trifles? The prisoners
won't mind, and _I_ don't mind: nobody's inconvenienced, and everybody's
happy!"

"You're right there, Mr. Mayor," put in another councilman. "This
executing business used to give the town a lot of trouble and bother;
now it's all as easy as kiss-your-hand. Instead of objecting, as they
used to do, and wanting to argue the point and kick up a row, the
fellows as is told off for execution come skipping along in the morning,
like a lot of lambs in May-time. And then the fun there is on the
scaffold! The jokes, the back answers, the repartees! And never a word
to shock a baby! Why, my little girl, as goes through the market-place
every morning--on her way to school, you know--she says to me only
yesterday, she says, 'Why, father,' she says, 'it's as good as the
play-actors,' she says."

"There again," persisted Robinet; "I object to that too. They ought to
show a properer feeling. Playing at mummers is one thing, and being
executed is another, and people ought to keep 'em separate. In my
father's time, that sort of thing wasn't thought good taste, and I don't
hold with new-fangled notions."

"Well, really, neighbour," said the Mayor, "I think you're out of sorts
yourself to-day. You must have got out of bed the wrong side this
morning. As for a little joke, more or less, we all know a maiden loves
a merry jest when she's certain of having the last word! But I'll tell
you what I'll do, if it'll please you; I'll go round and see Jeanne
myself on my way home, and tell her--quite nicely, you know--that once
in a way doesn't matter; but that if she feels her health won't let her
keep regular business hours, she mustn't think of going on with anything
that's bad for her. Like that, don't you see? And now, gentlemen, let's
read the minutes!"

Thus it came about that Jeanne took her usual walk that evening with a
ruffled brow and a swelling heart; and her little hand opened and shut
angrily as she paced the ramparts. She couldn't stand being found fault
with. How could she help having a headache? Those clods of citizens
didn't know what a highly strung sensitive organisation was. Absorbed in
her reflections, she had taken several turns up and down the grassy
footway before she became aware that she was not alone. A youth, of
richer dress and more elegant bearing than the general run of the
Radegundians, was leaning in an embrasure, watching the graceful figure
with evident interest.

"Something has vexed you, fair maiden?" he observed, coming forward
deferentially as soon as he perceived he was noticed; "and care sits but
awkwardly on that smooth young brow."

"Nay, it is nothing, kind sir," replied Jeanne; "we girls who work for
our living must not be too sensitive. My employers have been somewhat
exigent, that is all. I did wrong to take it to heart."

"'Tis the way of the bloated capitalist," rejoined the young man
lightly, as he turned to walk by her side. "They grind us, they grind
us; perhaps some day they will come under your hands in turn, and then
you can pay them out. And so you toil and spin, fair lily! And yet,
methinks, those delicate hands show little trace of labour?"

"You wrong me, indeed, sir," replied Jeanne merrily. "These hands of
mine, that you are so good as to admire, do great execution!"

"I can well believe that your victims are numerous," he replied; "may I
be permitted to rank myself among the latest of them?"

"I wish you a better fortune, kind sir," answered Jeanne demurely.

"I can imagine no more delightful one," he replied; "and where do you
ply your daily task, fair mistress? Not entirely out of sight and
access, I trust?"

    [Illustration: "Au revoir, sir! If you should happen to be in
     the market-place any morning."]

"Nay, sir," laughed Jeanne, "I work in the market-place most mornings,
and there is no charge for admission; and access is far from difficult.
Indeed, some complain--but that is no business of mine. And now I must
be wishing you a good-evening. Nay,"--for he would have detained
her,--"it is not seemly for an unprotected maiden to tarry in
converse with a stranger at this hour. _Au revoir_, sir! If you should
happen to be in the market-place any morning----" And she tripped
lightly away. The youth, gazing after her retreating figure, confessed
himself strangely fascinated by this fair unknown, whose particular
employment, by the way, he had forgotten to ask; while Jeanne, as she
sped homewards, could not help reflecting that, for style and
distinction, this new acquaintance threw into the shade all the
Enguerrands and others she had met hitherto--even in the course of
business.




IV


The next morning was bright and breezy, and Jeanne was early at her
post, feeling quite a different girl. The busy little market-place was
full of colour and movement, and the gay patches of flowers and fruit,
the strings of fluttering kerchiefs, and the piles of red and yellow
pottery, formed an artistic setting to the quiet impressive scaffold
which they framed. Jeanne was in short sleeves, according to the
etiquette of her office, and her round graceful arms showed snowily
against her dark blue skirt and scarlet, tight-fitting bodice. Her
assistant looked at her with admiration.

"Hope you're better, miss," he said respectfully. "It was just as well
you didn't put yourself out to come yesterday; there was nothing
particular to do. Only one fellow, and _he_ said he didn't care;
anything to oblige a lady!"

"Well, I wish he'd hurry up now, to oblige a lady," said Jeanne,
swinging her axe carelessly to and fro: "ten minutes past the hour; I
shall have to talk to the Mayor about this."

"It's a pity there ain't a better show this morning," pursued the
assistant, as he leant over the rail of the scaffold and spat
meditatively into the busy throng below. "They do say as how the young
Seigneur arrived at the Château yesterday--him as has been finishing his
education in Paris, you know. He's as likely as not to be in the
market-place to-day; and if he's disappointed, he may go off to Paris
again, which would be a pity, seeing the Château's been empty so long.
But he may go to Paris, or anywhere else he's a mind to, he won't see
better workmanship than in this here little town!"

"Well, my good Raoul," said Jeanne, colouring slightly at the obvious
compliment, "quality, not quantity, is what we aim at here, you know. If
a Paris education has been properly assimilated by the Seigneur, he will
not fail to make all the necessary allowances. But see, the prison-doors
are opening at last!"

    [Illustration: Endeavouring to convey the tardy prisoner to the
     scaffold.]

They both looked across the little square to the prison, which fronted
the scaffold; and sure enough, a small body of men, the Sheriff at their
head, was issuing from the building, conveying, or endeavouring to
convey, the tardy prisoner to the scaffold. That gentleman, however,
seemed to be in a different and less obliging frame of mind from that of
the previous day; and at every pace one or other of the guards was shot
violently into the middle of the square, propelled by a vigorous kick or
blow from the struggling captive. The crowd, unaccustomed of late to
such demonstrations of feeling, and resenting the prisoner's want of
taste, hooted loudly; but it was not until that ingenious mediæval
arrangement known as _la marche aux crapauds_ had been brought to bear
on him that the reluctant convict could be prevailed upon to present
himself before the young lady he had already so unwarrantably detained.

Jeanne's profession had both accustomed her to surprises and taught her
the futility of considering her clients as drawn from any one particular
class; yet she could hardly help feeling some astonishment on
recognising her new acquaintance of the previous evening. That, with all
his evident amiability of character, he should come to this end, was not
in itself a special subject for wonder; but that he should have been
conversing with her on the ramparts at the hour when--after courteously
excusing her attendance on the scaffold--he was cooling his heels in
prison for another day, seemed hardly to be accounted for, at first
sight. Jeanne, however, reflected that the reconciling of apparent
contradictions was not included in her official duties.

The Sheriff, wiping his heated brow, now read the formal _procès_
delivering over the prisoner to the executioner's hands; "and a nice job
we've had to get him here," he added on his own account. And the young
man, who had remained perfectly tractable since his arrival, stepped
forward and bowed politely.

"Now that we have been properly introduced," said he courteously, "allow
me to apologise for any inconvenience you have been put to by my delay.
The fault was entirely mine, and these gentlemen are in no way to blame.
Had I known whom I was to have the pleasure of meeting, wings could not
have conveyed me swiftly enough."

"Do not mention, I pray, the word inconvenience," replied Jeanne, with
that timid grace which so well became her. "I only trust that any slight
discomfort it may be my duty to cause you before we part will be as
easily pardoned. And now--for the morning, alas! advances--any little
advice or assistance that I can offer is quite at your service; for the
situation is possibly new, and you may have had but little experience."

"Faith! none worth mentioning," said the prisoner gaily. "Treat me as a
raw beginner. Though our acquaintance has been but brief, I have the
utmost confidence in you."

"Then, sir," said Jeanne, blushing, "suppose I were to assist you in
removing this gay doublet, so as to give both of us more freedom and
less responsibility?"

"A perquisite of the office?" queried the prisoner with a smile, as he
slipped one arm out of its sleeve.

A flush came over Jeanne's fair brow. "That was ungenerous," she said.

"Nay, pardon me, sweet one," said he, laughing: "'twas but a poor jest
of mine--in bad taste, I willingly admit."

    [Illustration: "Nay pardon me, sweet one, 'twas but a jest of
     mine."]

"I was sure you did not mean to hurt me," she replied kindly, while her
fingers were busy in turning back the collar of his shirt. It was
composed, she noticed, of the finest point lace; and she could not
help a feeling of regret that some slight error--as must, from what she
knew, exist somewhere--should compel her to take a course so at variance
with her real feelings. Her only comfort was that the youth himself
seemed entirely satisfied with his situation. He hummed the last air
from Paris during her ministrations, and when she had quite finished,
kissed the pretty fingers with a metropolitan grace.

"And now, sir," said Jeanne, "if you will kindly come this way: and
please to mind the step--so. Now, if you will have the goodness to kneel
here--nay, the sawdust is perfectly clean; you are my first client this
morning. On the other side of the block you will find a nick, more or
less adapted to the human chin, though a perfect fit cannot, of course,
be guaranteed in every case. So! Are you pretty comfortable?"

"A bed of roses," replied the prisoner. "And what a really admirable
view one gets of the valley and the river, from just this particular
point!"

"Charming, is it not?" replied Jeanne. "I'm so glad you do justice to
it. Some of your predecessors have really quite vexed me by their
inability to appreciate that view. It's worth coming here to see it. And
now, to return to business for one moment,--would you prefer to give the
word yourself? Some people do; it's a mere matter of taste. Or will you
leave yourself entirely in my hands?"

"Oh, in your fair hands," replied her client, "which I beg you to
consider respectfully kissed once more by your faithful servant to
command."

Jeanne, blushing rosily, stepped back a pace, moistening her palms as
she grasped her axe, when a puffing and blowing behind caused her to
turn her head, and she perceived the Mayor hastily ascending the
scaffold.

"Hold on a minute, Jeanne, my girl," he gasped. "Don't be in a hurry.
There's been some little mistake."

Jeanne drew herself up with dignity. "I'm afraid I don't quite
understand you, Mr. Mayor," she replied in freezing accents. "There's
been no little mistake on my part that I'm aware of."

"No, no, no," said the Mayor apologetically; "but on somebody else's
there has. You see it happened in this way: this here young fellow was
going round the town last night; and he'd been dining, I should say, and
he was carrying on rather free. I will only say so much in your
presence, that he was carrying on decidedly free. So the town-guard
happened to come across him, and he was very high and very haughty, he
was, and wouldn't give his name nor yet his address--as a gentleman
should, you know, when he's been dining and carrying on free. So our
fellows just ran him in--and it took the pick of them all their time to
do it, too. Well, then, the other chap who was in prison--the gentleman
who obliged you yesterday, you know--what does he do but slip out and
run away in the middle of all the row and confusion; and very
inconsiderate and ungentlemanly it was of him to take advantage of us in
that mean way, just when we wanted a little sympathy and forbearance.
Well, the Sheriff comes this morning to fetch out his man for execution,
and he knows there's only one man to execute, and he sees there's only
one man in prison, and it all seems as simple as A B C--he never was
much of a mathematician, you know--so he fetches our friend here along,
quite gaily. And--and that's how it came about, you see; _hinc illæ
lachrymæ_, as the Roman poet has it. So now I shall just give this young
fellow a good talking to, and discharge him with a caution; and we
sha'n't require you any more to-day, Jeanne, my girl."

"Now, look here, Mr. Mayor," said Jeanne severely, "you utterly fail to
grasp the situation in its true light. All these little details may be
interesting in themselves, and doubtless the press will take note of
them; but they are entirely beside the point. With the muddleheadedness
of your officials (which I have frequently remarked upon) I have nothing
whatever to do. All I know is, that this young gentleman has been
formally handed over to me for execution, with all the necessary legal
requirements; and executed he has got to be. When my duty has been
performed, you are at liberty to reopen the case if you like; and any
'little mistake' that may have occurred through your stupidity you can
then rectify at your leisure. Meantime, you've no _locus standi_ here at
all; in fact, you've no business whatever lumbering up my scaffold. So
shut up and clear out."

"Now, Jeanne, do be reasonable," implored the Mayor. "You women are so
precise. You never will make any allowance for the necessary margin of
error in things."

"If I were to allow the necessary margin for all _your_ errors, Mayor,"
replied Jeanne coolly, "the edition would have to be a large-paper one,
and even then the text would stand a poor chance. And now, if you
don't allow me the necessary margin to swing my axe, there may be
another 'little mistake'----"

    [Illustration: But at this point a hubbub arose at the foot of
     the scaffold.]

But at this point a hubbub arose at the foot of the scaffold, and
Jeanne, leaning over, perceived sundry tall fellows, clad in the livery
of the Seigneur, engaged in dispersing the municipal guard by the agency
of well-directed kicks, applied with heartiness and anatomical
knowledge. A moment later, there strode on to the scaffold, clad in
black velvet, and adorned with his gold chain of office, the stately old
seneschal of the Château, evidently in a towering passion.

"Now, mark my words, you miserable little bladder-o'-lard," he roared at
the Mayor (whose bald head certainly shone provokingly in the morning
sun), "see if I don't take this out of your skin presently!" And he
passed on to where the youth was still kneeling, apparently quite
absorbed in the view.

"My lord," he said firmly though respectfully, "your hair-brained folly
really passes all bounds. Have you entirely lost your head?"

"Faith, nearly," said the young man, rising and stretching himself. "Is
that you, old Thibault? Ow, what a crick I've got in my neck! But that
view of the valley was really delightful!"

"Did you come here simply to admire the view, my lord?" inquired
Thibault severely.

    [Illustration: "Now mark my words you miserable little
     bladder-o'-lard, see if I don't take this out of your skin
     presently."]

"I came because my horse would come," replied the young Seigneur
lightly: "that is, these gentlemen here were so pressing; they would not
hear of any refusal; and besides, they forgot to mention what my
attendance was required in such a hurry for. And when I got here,
Thibault, old fellow, and saw that divine creature--nay, a goddess,
_dea certé_--so graceful, so modest, so anxious to acquit herself with
credit---- Well, you know my weakness; I never could bear to disappoint
a woman. She had evidently set her heart on taking my head; and as she
had my heart already----"

"I think, my lord," said Thibault, with some severity, "you had better
let me escort you back to the Château. This appears to be hardly a safe
place for light-headed and susceptible persons!"

Jeanne, as was natural, had the last word. "Understand me, Mr. Mayor,"
said she, "these proceedings are entirely irregular. I decline to
recognise them, and when the quarter expires I shall claim the usual
bonus!"




V


When, an hour or two later, an invitation arrived--courteously worded
but significantly backed by an escort of half-a-dozen tall archers--for
both Jeanne and the Mayor to attend at the Château without delay, Jeanne
for her part received it with neither surprise nor reluctance. She had
felt it especially hard that the only two interviews fate had granted
her with the one man who had made some impression on her heart should be
hampered, the one by considerations of propriety, the other by the
conflicting claims of her profession and its duties. On this
occasion, now, she would have an excellent chaperon in the Mayor; and,
business being over for the day, they could meet and unbend on a common
social footing. The Mayor was not at all surprised either, considering
what had gone before; but he was exceedingly terrified, and sought some
consolation from Jeanne as they proceeded together to the Château. That
young lady's remarks, however, could hardly be called exactly
comforting.

    [Illustration: An invitation arrived, backed by an escort of
     half-a-dozen tall archers.]

"I always thought you'd put your foot in it some day, Mayor," she said.
"You are so hopelessly wanting in system and method. Really, under the
present happy-go-lucky police arrangements, I never know whom I may not
be called upon to execute. Between you and my cousin Enguerrand, life is
hardly safe in this town. And the worst of it is, that we other
officials on the staff have to share in the discredit."

"What do you think they'll do to me, Jeanne?" whimpered the Mayor,
perspiring freely.

"Can't say, I'm sure," pursued the candid Jeanne. "Of course, if it's
anything in the _rack_ line of business, I shall have to superintend the
arrangements, and then you can feel sure you're in capable hands. But
probably they'll only fine you pretty smartly, give you a month or two
in the dungeons, and dismiss you from your post; and you will hardly
grudge any slight personal inconvenience resulting from an arrangement
so much to the advantage of the town."

This was hardly reassuring, but the Mayor's official reprimand of the
previous day still rankled in this unforgiving young person's mind.

On their reaching the Château the Mayor was conducted aside, to be dealt
with by Thibault; and from the sounds of agonised protestation and
lament which shortly reached Jeanne's ears, it was evident that he was
having a _mauvais quart d'heure_. The young lady was shown respectfully
into a chamber apart, where she had hardly had time to admire
sufficiently the good taste of the furniture and the magnificence of the
tapestry with which the walls were hung, when the Seigneur entered and
welcomed her with a cordial grace that put her entirely at her ease.

"Your punctuality puts me to shame, fair mistress," he said,
"considering how unwarrantably I kept you waiting this morning, and how
I tested your patience by my ignorance and awkwardness."

He had changed his dress, and the lace round his neck was even richer
than before. Jeanne had always considered one of the chief marks of a
well-bred man to be a fine disregard for the amount of his washing-bill;
and then with what good taste he referred to recent events--putting
himself in the wrong, as a gentleman should!

"Indeed, my lord," she replied modestly, "I was only too anxious to hear
from your own lips that you bore me no ill-will for the part forced on
me by circumstances in our recent interview. Your lordship has
sufficient critical good sense, I feel sure, to distinguish between the
woman and the official."

"True, Jeanne," he replied, drawing nearer; "and while I shrink from
expressing, in their fulness, all the feelings that the woman inspires
in me, I have no hesitation--for I know it will give you pleasure--in
acquainting you with the entire artistic satisfaction with which I
watched you at your task!"

"But, indeed," said Jeanne, "you did not see me at my best. In fact, I
can't help wishing--it's ridiculous, I know, because the thing is hardly
practicable--but if I could only have carried my performance quite
through, and put the last finishing touches to it, you would not have
been judging me now by the mere 'blocking-in' of what promised to be a
masterpiece!"

"Yes, I wish it could have been arranged somehow," said the Seigneur,
reflectively; "but perhaps it's better as it is. I am content to let the
artist remain for the present on trust, if I may only take over, fully
paid up, the woman I adore!"

Jeanne felt strangely weak. The official seemed oozing out at her
fingers and toes, while the woman's heart beat even more distressingly.

"I have one little question to ask," he murmured (his arm was about her
now).

"Do I understand that you still claim your bonus?"

Jeanne felt like water in his strong embrace; but she nerved herself to
answer, faintly but firmly, "Yes!"

"Then so do I," he replied, as his lips met hers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Executions continued to occur in St. Radegonde; the Radegundians being
conservative and very human. But much of the innocent enjoyment that
formerly attended them departed after the fair Châtelaine had ceased to
officiate. Enguerrand, on succeeding to the post, wedded Clairette, she
being (he was heard to say) a more suitable match in mind and temper
than others of whom he would name no names. Rumour had it, that he found
his match and something over; while as for temper--and mind (which she
gave him in bits). But the domestic trials of high-placed officials have
a right to be held sacred. The profession, in spite of his best
endeavours, languished nevertheless. Some said that the scaffold lacked
its old attraction for criminals of spirit; others, more unkindly, that
the headsman was the innocent cause, and that Enguerrand was less fatal
in his new sphere than formerly, when practising in the criminal court
as advocate for the defence.


[Illustration: THE END]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Headswoman, by Kenneth Grahame

